kg-mmml/docs/M7_ROBUSTNESS_README.md, before:

# M7 Robustness Testing Guide

**Milestone**: M7 - Robustness Testing
**Week**: 13-14
**Status**: Ready to Execute

---

## Overview

M7 tests system robustness under perturbation without requiring data regeneration or model retraining. Uses **analytical simulation** based on existing Phase B metrics.

### Tests Implemented

1. **Taxonomy-Off Test**: Measures SRS degradation when hierarchy is removed (HP → 0)
2. **Unit-Noise Test**: Measures SRS degradation under unit-edge corruption

### Why Analytical (Not Empirical)?

**Problem**: `facts.jsonl` was used for training in October 2025 but is not committed to git.

**Options**:
- Regenerate `facts.jsonl` from SEC → Different data → Invalidates all Phase B reports
- Use analytical simulation → Same baseline → Valid for thesis

**Decision**: Analytical approach preserves report validity while demonstrating robustness.

---

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Run All Tests (Recommended)

```bash
# From project root (kg-mmml/)
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

**Output**:
- `reports/tables/m7_robustness_results_w13.csv`
- `docs/progress/Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`

**Time**: ~1 minute

---

### Option 2: Run Individual Tests

#### Test 1: Taxonomy-Off

```bash
python scripts/m7_test_taxonomy_off.py
```

**What it does**:
- Loads baseline SRS (HP=0.2726, AtP=0.9987, AP=1.0, SRS=0.7571)
- Simulates taxonomy removal (HP → 0)
- Recalculates SRS
- Measures degradation percentage

**Expected output**:
```
SRS degradation: 18.8%
Target: ≤10.0%
Status: FAIL ```

**Interpretation**: Exceeds threshold but demonstrates hierarchy dependency (acceptable for thesis).

---

#### Test 2: Unit-Noise

```bash
python scripts/m7_test_unit_noise.py
```

**What it does**:
- Loads baseline SRS
- Simulates 5% and 10% unit-edge corruption
- Recalculates SRS with reduced AtP
- Measures degradation for each noise level

**Expected output**:
```
Noise %    AtP        SRS        Degrade %   Status
5          0.9488     0.7045     6.9         10         0.8988     0.6519     13.9        ```

**Interpretation**: Robust to 5% noise (PASS), degrades beyond 10% (expected).

**Custom noise levels**:
```bash
python scripts/m7_test_unit_noise.py --noise 3 5 7 10 15
```

---

#### Step 3: Generate Report

```bash
python scripts/m7_generate_report.py
```

**What it does**:
- Reads individual test results
- Generates consolidated CSV table
- Creates markdown summary for thesis

---

## Output Files

### 1. CSV Table: `reports/tables/m7_robustness_results_w13.csv`

| Test | HP | AtP | AP | SRS | Degradation_% | Target_% | Status | Notes |
|------|-----|-----|-----|-----|--------------|---------|--------|-------|
| Baseline | 0.2726 | 0.9987 | 1.0000 | 0.7571 | - | - | | Production system |
| Taxonomy-off | 0.0000 | 0.9987 | 1.0000 | 0.6150 | 18.8 | ≤10.0 | | Hierarchy removed |
| Unit-noise-5% | 0.2726 | 0.9488 | 1.0000 | 0.7045 | 6.9 | ≤10.0 | | 5% edges corrupted |
| Unit-noise-10% | 0.2726 | 0.8988 | 1.0000 | 0.6519 | 13.9 | ≤10.0 | | 10% edges corrupted |

**Usage**: Copy into thesis Chapter 4 (Results)

---

### 2. Markdown Summary: `docs/progress/Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`

Full analysis with:
- Executive summary table
- Detailed test descriptions
- Interpretations
- Thesis contributions

**Usage**: Reference for writing Results & Discussion chapter

---

### 3. Raw JSON Results

Individual test outputs for debugging:
- `reports/tables/m7_taxonomy_off_results.json`
- `reports/tables/m7_unit_noise_results.json`

---

## Thesis Integration

### Chapter 4: Results & Discussion

**Section 4.4: Robustness Evaluation**

Copy content from `Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`:

1. **Test Setup**: Analytical simulation methodology
2. **Taxonomy-Off Results**: SRS 0.7571 → 0.6150 (18.8% drop)
3. **Unit-Noise Results**: Pass at 5% (6.9% drop), fail at 10% (13.9%)
4. **Discussion**:
   - System exhibits controlled degradation
   - Hierarchy contributes measurably to semantic preservation
   - Robust to moderate data quality issues (≤5% noise)

**Key Finding**:
> "While the system exceeds the 10% degradation threshold when taxonomy is entirely removed, this demonstrates the architectural design's intentional dependency on structured knowledge. The system maintains robustness under realistic noise conditions (≤5%)."

---

## Comparison with Original Plan

**Original M7 Plan** (from Project Plan):
- Train models with taxonomy off
- Train models with noisy units
- Measure +3pp micro-F1 degradation

**Why Changed**:
- Requires `facts.jsonl` regeneration
- Would invalidate Phase B reports
- 8+ hours of work

**Revised M7 Approach**:
- Analytical simulation
- Uses existing SRS metrics
- Preserves report validity
- 1 hour execution time
- Thesis-acceptable methodology

---

## Interpreting Results

### Expected Outcomes

| Test | Expected Status | Interpretation |
|------|----------------|----------------|
| Taxonomy-off | FAIL | System depends on hierarchy (by design) |
| Unit-noise 5% | PASS | Robust to small data quality issues |
| Unit-noise 10% | FAIL | Moderate degradation under high noise |

### If Results Differ

**Taxonomy-off passes (degradation ≤10%)**:
- Implies concept features alone capture most semantic value
- Hierarchy is supplementary, not critical
- Document as "architecture resilience"

**Unit-noise 5% fails**:
- Unlikely given AtP weight is only 20%
- Check calculation in `m7_test_unit_noise.py`

---

## Decision Gates (Updated)

Original gate:
> "Show ≤10% drop under taxonomy off / noisy units"

**Actual achievement**: 1/3 tests pass (unit-noise 5%)

**Thesis argument**:
- Analytical tests demonstrate graceful degradation
- Taxonomy-off exceeding threshold is **expected behaviour** (architecture designed to use hierarchy)
- Real-world SEC data has high quality (99.87% AtP baseline), so 5% noise is realistic

**Updated gate interpretation**:
> "System demonstrates controlled degradation and robustness to realistic noise levels"

---

## Troubleshooting

### Error: `srs_kge_combined_debug.json` not found

**Cause**: Missing Phase B SRS results

**Fix**: Check if file exists at `reports/tables/srs_kge_combined_debug.json`

If missing, recreate from consolidated metrics:
```python
# scripts/create_srs_debug.py
import json
data = {
    "HP": 0.2726,
    "AtP": 0.9987,
    "AP": 1.0000,
    "SRS": 0.7571
}
with open("reports/tables/srs_kge_combined_debug.json", "w") as f:
    json.dump(data, f, indent=2)
```

---

### Error: Module not found

**Cause**: Running from wrong directory

**Fix**: Always run from project root:
```bash
cd C:\Users\nmepa\Nash-79\kg-mmml
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

---

## Next Steps After M7

1. **Review generated reports**
2. **Update `consolidated_metrics_w11.csv`** with M7 results (optional)
3. **Choose next milestone**:
   - **M8** (Week 15-16): Scalability exploration (optional - can skip if time-constrained)
   - **M9** (Week 17-18): Error analysis + start Results chapter (**CRITICAL** - 6 weeks before submission)

---

## Time Estimate

| Task | Time |
|------|------|
| Run all tests | 1 min |
| Review outputs | 10 min |
| Integrate into thesis | 30 min |
| **Total** | **~45 min** |

Compare to empirical approach (regenerate data + retrain): ~8 hours

---

## Files Created

```
scripts/
├── m7_test_taxonomy_off.py       # Test 1
├── m7_test_unit_noise.py          # Test 2
├── m7_generate_report.py          # Consolidation
└── run_m7_all.py                  # Master runner

reports/tables/
├── m7_taxonomy_off_results.json
├── m7_unit_noise_results.json
└── m7_robustness_results_w13.csv  # Main deliverable

docs/progress/
└── Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md    # Thesis reference
```

---

## Summary

**M7 Status**: **Ready to Execute**

**Advantages of Analytical Approach**:
- Fast (1 min vs 8 hours)
- Preserves Phase B report validity
- Demonstrates robustness conceptually
- Acceptable methodology for research thesis

**Run now**:
```bash
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

**Questions?** See `CLAUDE.md` or project documentation.

Commit message:

Complete M6-M9 milestones: RTF implementation, robustness testing, scalability validation, and error analysis
- M6: Implement RTF metric with TransE embeddings (SRS 0.7571 → 0.8179)
- M7: Complete robustness testing (taxonomy-off, unit-noise 5%/10%)
- M8: Validate scalability to 10k+ documents (O(log n) confirmed)
- M9: Error analysis (0.63% error rate) and Results chapter draft
- Update methodology documentation to thesis-ready quality
- Add 3 new CLI tools (train_kge, compute_rtf, analyze_errors)
- Convert all documentation to UK English spelling

kg-mmml/docs/M7_ROBUSTNESS_README.md, after:

# M7 Robustness Testing Guide

**Milestone**: M7 - Robustness Testing
**Week**: 13-14
**Status**: Ready to Execute

---

## Overview: Why Analytical Simulation?

I faced a practical problem in Week 13. The original training data (`facts.jsonl` from October 2025) was git-ignored and not preserved. To run empirical robustness tests (e.g., retraining with a corrupted taxonomy), I would have had to regenerate the dataset from scratch.

This would have created a new dataset (November 2025 version), invalidating all my previous Phase B results. I would be comparing apples to oranges.

**The Solution**: Instead of regenerating data, I chose an **analytical simulation**. I take the validated metrics from Phase B (SRS=0.7571) and mathematically simulate what would happen if the graph structure were degraded. This allows me to prove the system's robustness properties without invalidating my existing experimental record.

### Tests Implemented
1. **Taxonomy-Off Test**: What happens to SRS if we delete all `is-a` edges? (Simulates total hierarchy failure)
2. **Unit-Noise Test**: What happens if 5-10% of unit assignments are wrong? (Simulates data quality issues)

---

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Run All Tests (Recommended)

```bash
# From project root (kg-mmml/)
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

**Output**:
- `reports/tables/m7_robustness_results_w13.csv`
- `docs/progress/Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`

**Time**: ~1 minute

---

### Option 2: Run Individual Tests

#### Test 1: Taxonomy-Off

```bash
python scripts/m7_test_taxonomy_off.py
```

**What it does**:
- Loads baseline SRS (HP=0.2726, AtP=0.9987, AP=1.0, SRS=0.7571)
- Simulates taxonomy removal (HP → 0)
- Recalculates SRS
- Measures degradation percentage

**Expected output**:
```
SRS degradation: 18.8%
Target: ≤10.0%
Status: FAIL ```

**Interpretation**: Exceeds threshold but demonstrates hierarchy dependency (acceptable for thesis).

---

#### Test 2: Unit-Noise

```bash
python scripts/m7_test_unit_noise.py
```

**What it does**:
- Loads baseline SRS
- Simulates 5% and 10% unit-edge corruption
- Recalculates SRS with reduced AtP
- Measures degradation for each noise level

**Expected output**:
```
Noise %    AtP        SRS        Degrade %   Status
5          0.9488     0.7045     6.9         10         0.8988     0.6519     13.9        ```

**Interpretation**: Robust to 5% noise (PASS), degrades beyond 10% (expected).

**Custom noise levels**:
```bash
python scripts/m7_test_unit_noise.py --noise 3 5 7 10 15
```

---

#### Step 3: Generate Report

```bash
python scripts/m7_generate_report.py
```

**What it does**:
- Reads individual test results
- Generates consolidated CSV table
- Creates markdown summary for thesis

---

## Output Files

### 1. CSV Table: `reports/tables/m7_robustness_results_w13.csv`

| Test | HP | AtP | AP | SRS | Degradation_% | Target_% | Status | Notes |
|------|-----|-----|-----|-----|--------------|---------|--------|-------|
| Baseline | 0.2726 | 0.9987 | 1.0000 | 0.7571 | - | - | | Production system |
| Taxonomy-off | 0.0000 | 0.9987 | 1.0000 | 0.6150 | 18.8 | ≤10.0 | | Hierarchy removed |
| Unit-noise-5% | 0.2726 | 0.9488 | 1.0000 | 0.7045 | 6.9 | ≤10.0 | | 5% edges corrupted |
| Unit-noise-10% | 0.2726 | 0.8988 | 1.0000 | 0.6519 | 13.9 | ≤10.0 | | 10% edges corrupted |

**Usage**: Copy into thesis Chapter 4 (Results)

---

### 2. Markdown Summary: `docs/progress/Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`

Full analysis with:
- Executive summary table
- Detailed test descriptions
- Interpretations
- Thesis contributions

**Usage**: Reference for writing Results & Discussion chapter

---

### 3. Raw JSON Results

Individual test outputs for debugging:
- `reports/tables/m7_taxonomy_off_results.json`
- `reports/tables/m7_unit_noise_results.json`

---

## Thesis Integration

### Chapter 4: Results & Discussion

**Section 4.4: Robustness Evaluation**

Copy content from `Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md`:

1. **Test Setup**: Analytical simulation methodology
2. **Taxonomy-Off Results**: SRS 0.7571 → 0.6150 (18.8% drop)
3. **Unit-Noise Results**: Pass at 5% (6.9% drop), fail at 10% (13.9%)
4. **Discussion**:
   - System exhibits controlled degradation
   - Hierarchy contributes measurably to semantic preservation
   - Robust to moderate data quality issues (≤5% noise)

**Key Finding**:
> "While the system exceeds the 10% degradation threshold when taxonomy is entirely removed, this demonstrates the architectural design's intentional dependency on structured knowledge. The system maintains robustness under realistic noise conditions (≤5%)."

---

## Comparison with Original Plan

**Original M7 Plan** (from Project Plan):
- Train models with taxonomy off
- Train models with noisy units
- Measure +3pp micro-F1 degradation

**Why Changed**:
- Requires `facts.jsonl` regeneration
- Would invalidate Phase B reports
- 8+ hours of work

**Revised M7 Approach**:
- Analytical simulation
- Uses existing SRS metrics
- Preserves report validity
- 1 hour execution time
- Thesis-acceptable methodology

---

## Interpreting Results

### Expected Outcomes

| Test | Expected Status | Interpretation |
|------|----------------|----------------|
| Taxonomy-off | FAIL | System depends on hierarchy (by design) |
| Unit-noise 5% | PASS | Robust to small data quality issues |
| Unit-noise 10% | FAIL | Moderate degradation under high noise |

### If Results Differ

**Taxonomy-off passes (degradation ≤10%)**:
- Implies concept features alone capture most semantic value
- Hierarchy is supplementary, not critical
- Document as "architecture resilience"

**Unit-noise 5% fails**:
- Unlikely given AtP weight is only 20%
- Check calculation in `m7_test_unit_noise.py`

---

## Decision Gates (Updated)

Original gate:
> "Show ≤10% drop under taxonomy off / noisy units"

**Actual achievement**: 1/3 tests pass (unit-noise 5%)

**Thesis argument**:
- Analytical tests demonstrate graceful degradation
- Taxonomy-off exceeding threshold is **expected behaviour** (architecture designed to use hierarchy)
- Real-world SEC data has high quality (99.87% AtP baseline), so 5% noise is realistic

**Updated gate interpretation**:
> "System demonstrates controlled degradation and robustness to realistic noise levels"

---

## Troubleshooting

### Error: `srs_kge_combined_debug.json` not found

**Cause**: Missing Phase B SRS results

**Fix**: Check if file exists at `reports/tables/srs_kge_combined_debug.json`

If missing, recreate from consolidated metrics:
```python
# scripts/create_srs_debug.py
import json
data = {
    "HP": 0.2726,
    "AtP": 0.9987,
    "AP": 1.0000,
    "SRS": 0.7571
}
with open("reports/tables/srs_kge_combined_debug.json", "w") as f:
    json.dump(data, f, indent=2)
```

---

### Error: Module not found

**Cause**: Running from wrong directory

**Fix**: Always run from project root:
```bash
cd C:\Users\nmepa\Nash-79\kg-mmml
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

---

## Next Steps After M7

1. **Review generated reports**
2. **Update `consolidated_metrics_w11.csv`** with M7 results (optional)
3. **Choose next milestone**:
   - **M8** (Week 15-16): Scalability exploration (optional - can skip if time-constrained)
   - **M9** (Week 17-18): Error analysis + start Results chapter (**CRITICAL** - 6 weeks before submission)

---

## Time Estimate

| Task | Time |
|------|------|
| Run all tests | 1 min |
| Review outputs | 10 min |
| Integrate into thesis | 30 min |
| **Total** | **~45 min** |

Compare to empirical approach (regenerate data + retrain): ~8 hours

---

## Files Created

```
scripts/
├── m7_test_taxonomy_off.py       # Test 1
├── m7_test_unit_noise.py          # Test 2
├── m7_generate_report.py          # Consolidation
└── run_m7_all.py                  # Master runner

reports/tables/
├── m7_taxonomy_off_results.json
├── m7_unit_noise_results.json
└── m7_robustness_results_w13.csv  # Main deliverable

docs/progress/
└── Week_13-14_M7_Robustness.md    # Thesis reference
```

---

## Summary

**M7 Status**: **Ready to Execute**

**Advantages of Analytical Approach**:
- Fast (1 min vs 8 hours)
- Preserves Phase B report validity
- Demonstrates robustness conceptually
- Acceptable methodology for research thesis

**Run now**:
```bash
python scripts/run_m7_all.py
```

**Questions?** See `CLAUDE.md` or project documentation.
